

Imagined Borders
An analysis of the narratives of identity relevant to the events of political violence that occurred in Nazi Germany, Guatemala, and Yugoslavia















Warren Wu
Cluster 48A Section 1H
December 9, 2022
Within the context of their respective conflicts, perpetrators in Nazi Germany, Guatemala, and Yugoslavia carried out mass killings against groups of innocent people they had deemed to be their enemies. In Germany, the Nazi government engaged in a campaign to paint all Jewish people as enemies of the state, a portrayal that would ultimately create the conditions that allowed for the Holocaust to occur. In Guatemala, colonial and modern leaders manufactured a narrative of superiority against the Indigenous people, a fantasy that aided the military in committing mass killings under General Efraín Ríos Montt in the twentieth century. In Yugoslavia, the otherization of Bosnian Muslims and ethnic Croats by the Serb-controlled Yugoslav government created deep rifts between the groups, causing a conflict that facilitated genocidal acts against Croat and Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) civilians. In all three cases of political violence, inherent religious, ethnic, and historical differences between the perpetrator and victim groups were amplified through the use of propagandistic media. These forms of visual, audible, and print media often portrayed the perpetrator groups as inherently superior to the victim groups. The normalization of these fantasies of superiority allowed the perpetrator groups to generalize and legally enforce oppressive treatment of the victim groups with little resistance from other groups. At the start, however, the characteristics inherent to the victim groups had not yet been twisted by the perpetrators into genocidal narratives.
	In each case of political violence, there were identifiable differences in the cultures and ways of life between the victim group and the perpetrator group. Prior to the Holocaust, Jewish people represented a minority in the majority-Protestant German state. This difference was purely religious, and Jewish people had not yet become racially defined separately from ethnic Germans. Yet, although the mass murder of Jews had not happened yet, anti-semitic attitudes from centuries ago had persisted through the development modern industrial state. In Guatemala, Indigenous people could be identified by their dress and language. Unlike Ladinos, who spoke Spanish and wore Western clothing, Indigenous people wore traditional clothing and spoke their own traditional languages. Ladinos come from mixed Indigenous and European ancestry, but as history shaped ethnic and cultural differences, they became defined as separate groups. Unlike the other two cases, the perpetrator groups and victim groups in Yugoslavia were all South Slavic and ethno-linguistically identical to each other. There were, however, religious differences between all groups. Croats were Catholic and associated themselves with Western Europe, Serbs were Orthodox Christian and saw themselves as associated with Eastern Europe, and Bosniaks (Bosnian Muslims) were Muslim, many of whom descended from Orthodox Serb converts to Islam during the period Bosnia was controlled by the Ottoman Empire. Although perpetrator and victim groups in all cases possessed undeniable cultural differences, no two groups were as diametrically opposed to each other as perpetrator leaders suggested.
	Leaders magnified these differences through the use of propaganda, depersonalizing the victims and labeling them all as enemies of the perpetrators. In the The Program of the German Workers’ Party: The Twenty-Five Points, published in a German Nationalist Socialist publication, the Nazis outlined the doctrine of their political party, which included the stipulation, “None but members of the nation may be citizens of the state. None but those of German blood, whatever their creed, may be members of the nation. No Jew therefore may be a member of the nation.” Here, Nazi leaders clearly communicated their belief that Jewish people were ethnically and racially separate from German people and therefore should not be considered German citizens. In this way, the Nazis began to strip the Jewish people of their individuality through the use of pseudoscientific ideology derived from Social Darwinist and eugenics theory. These views were expressed through radio, television, oral speech, and rituals, gradually instilling in the German people the fraudulent belief that Jews were inferior to the race of Aryans, which they belonged to. In Guatemala, since colonial times, elites have promoted the fantasy of European superiority over the native population. During the enlightenment period in the nineteenth century, these beliefs became intertwined with Western theories of Social Darwinism, pushing the falsehood that the Indigenous people were evolutionarily inferior to Europeans. Through the use of these repeated narratives, the differences between Ladinos and Indigenous people magnified, despite both groups sharing Indigenous ancestry. Later, in the twentieth century, the urban elites continued to reinforce harmful stereotypes through popular media that portrayed all Indigenous people as a lazy and dangerous monolith. After the disintegration of the Yugoslav state, Croat and Serb leaders used their platforms to denigrate victim groups with inflammatory language. In Serbia, President Slobodan Milošević and Bosnian Serb general Ratko Mladić called for the creation of “Greater Serbia,” a country that would encompass all land in the Balkans that Serbs thought rightfully belonged to them, including Serbia itself as well as territories in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ingrained in their rhetoric was the fantasy of Serb superiority over their neighbors, as they were the most populous group in Yugoslavia and had once been the origin of the royal family. They invoked historically and semantically charged words such as “Turk” to refer to Bosnian Muslims and “Ustasha” to refer to Croats. In this way, they generalized all members of the victim groups (Croats and Bosnian Muslims) and grouped them together as supposed enemies of all Serb people. Croat leaders, on the other hand, engaged in calls for “Greater Croatia” and advocated for Croatian independence from Yugoslavia. Fear-mongering politicians such as President Franjo Tudjman used similar rhetoric to further worsen the animosity between Croats, Serbs, and Bosnian Muslims. Rhetoric that hardened differences and depersonalized victims in all cases facilitated the enforcement of cruel treatment against victim groups. 
	As the rift between perpetrator and victim groups seemingly grew larger, perpetrators began to isolate the victims physically and socially with laws that specifically targeted them. In Nazi Germany, the mechanism for the isolation of the Jewish people was the Nuremberg Laws. According to the Reich Citizenship Law, “A Reich citizen is a subject of the state who is of German or related blood, and provides by his conduct that he is willing and fit to faithfully serve the German people and Reich.” This piece of legislation clearly excluded Jewish people from being and becoming German citizens. Later, the Nazis would create a biological definition of a “Jew,” which would include any individual having three or more Jewish grandparents. Furthermore, Jewish people were forbidden from flying the Reich flag or Reich colors, but were allowed to fly “Jewish colors.” Jewish people were banned from civil service and being lawyers, and a quota on Jewish students in German schools was instated. These laws, apart from being horribly racist and anti-semitic, were the beginning of the de-emancipation and dis-assimilation of Jewish people, along with other victim groups (including the Romani, disabled people, and LGBT individuals, among others) the Nazis had deemed detrimental to their society. This legislation effectively removed Jewish voices from the public sphere and singled out Jewish people for violence and harassment, making it easy to completely remove them from German society in just a couple of years. In colonial Guatemala, the persisting narrative of European superiority caused the Indigenous population to be physically separated from the European colonists. Indigenous people were often forced to convert to Catholicism, work in mines and on plantations, and vacate their homelands to live in the mountainous highlands of Guatemala. Centuries later, these Indigenous people were still physically separated from their Ladino counterparts, who lived in the urban areas of the country. Furthermore, Indigenous men were forced to work parts of the year in fincas or on plantations owned by the wealthy. These policies by colonial, and later, Guatemalan governments physically and legally isolated Indigenous populations from Ladino populations. In Yugoslavia, the policies that separated the victim group and the perpetrator group were concrete. As Croatian and Serbian voices became increasingly polarized, Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia. Croatian and Serbian leaders carved up the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the three groups of the former Yugoslavia began to self-organize into their own military units. In this way, the rhetoric of Serb and Croat leaders solidified the differences between all perpetrator and victim groups. In all cases, the legal isolation of the victim groups came as a direct result of propaganda that exaggerated inherent differences between them and the perpetrators. 
	While the details of the cases themselves were distinct, the manufacturing of differences in each case was deliberate and calculated. The perpetrators, seeking to realize their fantasies of eliminating the victim group, harnessed the power of the media to shape public perception. The drawing of physical and invisible dividing lines before the crimes and killings occurred reveal a more comprehensive picture of genocide–one that does not only involve acts of violence.
Works Cited

 "The Program of the German Workers’ Party: The Twenty-Five Points (1920),” in The Third Reich Reader (eds. Rabinbach and Gilman).
